---
layout: post
title:  "#1GAM 2016.02 Battle Bows"
date:   2016-02-29 17:41:35
categories: 1gam
---

## What Am I Doing Here?

This is really just a log for myself at this point, so that I try to look back, and remember how I got to the
stuck place that I did for this month, and what got me out of it. So the next time, I can work faster and get
out and back to being productive much faster.

Note that this is all recollected in hindsight, so there's not a lot of solid dates included. I could look up
dates much better using git logs, but I'm being lazy right now. If it's ever important to me to include those,
I'll hunt them down then.

## Notes for Next Time

I didn't want to ruin the way that the ending is presented at the end of this article, but there were a few
notes that I wanted to make sure to capture for next time, so things could be way better when it actually 
matters:

- make sure to include at least a few images
- if those images are GIFs of the game that go along with these paragraphs, even better

## Journal

### Friday, January 29th

At the PIGSquad Global Game Jam opening event, it was revealed that the theme for the weekend was "ritual."
Unfortunately, I wasn't staying (didn't RSVP and I had some family stuff as well that took me up North), but
I decided that I'd try to come up with a design for my next #1GAM project during that weekend, and see how it
fit in with the #1GAM theme.

Chillin' at a coffee shop nearby, I brainstormed all of the rituals that I'm aware of.  Daily rituals, coming-
of-age rituals, spiritual rituals, anything magic could be considered a ritual or can be ritualized, etc.
Listing out all of these things made me think about the hero's journey.  How it's used so much that it's a
storytelling ritual at this point, fulled with rituals itself.  So I decided to take a peak down that rabbit
hole.

Checking out the [wikipedia article][wiki-hj] on the subject, I find that there are a ton of stages, and it's
pretty cool listing them all out. Just looking at the first ones, I realize that this is way too big for anything
I might do at this point, however. I decide that what I need is a ritual that can be the kicking off point to a
much larger adventure in my head, so I start thinking of what rituals I can start to mold into a story fitting these.

# Original Story Premise

Ok, so one of the ideas that comes to me is of the classic ritual in a stereotypical tribal society of proving
a boy is worthy of becoming a man through their hunting prowess and usefulness to the tribe. So you've got a boy
being taken out on a hunt with his Dad. You go through what is a very quick intro, where you first learn to draw
your bow as your character takes down their ritual deer/elk/whatever. Out of the woods from the side comes a
bear, but with a sick, weird corrupted look to it (think anime black ooze situation). It knocks you aside, and
as you hit a rock or a tree getting blown away, the last thing you see before blacking out is the bear start to
go for your father.

When you wake up, you find your dead father in that clearing that you were thrown from. As you're just coming upon
him, a ghost appears in front of you. It's your father! But you can't go home. There's nothing there for you now.
And your father lets you know that that bear was driven rabid by a corruption that's spreading throughout the
forest, and will come for your village if you don't do anything to stop it. So you set off, with your spirit
father showing you the way & helping you take out the more and more corrupt small animals that interrupt your
journey to the home of the corruption.

Finally, you arrive at a cave. Your father stops you here. He lets you know that the corruption's source is within
the cave, and that you must find and destroy it. Unfortunately, the powers that have allowed him to help you are
waning, and he can no longer accompany you on your mission to fight the corruption.  Before you go inside, your
father says goodbye to you, and you see him fade away before having to take that next step into the darkness to
fight what threatens your village.  And, SCENE.

# Development Begins

I'm looking around for some art that I can use/buy. The stuff that I'm seeing for bowman is not that great. I
know that technically, I'm not supposed to care about art at this point, but I thought that having some nicer
art could really be a great motivator to development, especially early in the project. In particular, I'm
looking at some lists, & [Oryx Design Lab][odl] has a great and super simple [16-bit fantasy sprite set][16b]
that I'm really enjoying, so I pay for that & begin.

I'm playing around with it, and I'm seeing that magic's really where it's at, if you're talking about cool
art (at least for this set). So, I decide to make my little characters in wizards shooting fireballs. At first
this might have been replacement art, but pretty quickly I'd abandoned the whole idea for wizards shooting
fireballs at each other. I got a quick little AI going, and things were all good, until I started to bog down.

# The Bog

I believe there were two causes of the bog down.  One was technical, and it required me to only work a limited
set of time on the game, and only in a specific manner, really cutting down on my time for playing it. The other
was that I really didn't know what to do with this little wizard battle game that I'd ended up with. It was fun
just to play around with, but there wasn't any sort of drive that was screaming for new features in this way, or
supplying any ideas about what direction I should go in.

# The Light at the End of the Tunnel

That's when I saw the [PBS Game Show][pbs-gs] video [The Greatest Video Game Goals][pbs-gs-great-goals]. I always
love having frameworks to help me think about a particular subject. Since design is something I have actually no
experience in, it was great to see how goals provide motivation for the characters in the game, and I think for 
me as the developer of the game as well.

# The Ultimate Lesson

If I'm going to pivot the game itself in gameplay ways (or in any way really), the story & goals need to
stay up-to-date with that.

[wiki-hj]:            https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monomyth
[odl]:                http://oryxdesignlab.com/
[16b]:                http://oryxdesignlab.com/product-sprites/16-bit-fantasy-sprite-set
[pbs-gs]:             https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCr_2H8pPitVJ85bmpLwFUyQ
[pbs-gs-great-goals]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FAU-a6_oiX0
